
T
TABLE OF CONTENTS
V
U | Monsters
Details, lore, and statistics for all monsters in the Monster Manual beginning with the letter "U" are detailed below.

Umber Hulk

An abominable horror from deep beneath the earth, an umber hulk burrows into cave complexes, dungeons, or Underdark settlements in search of food. Those lucky enough to survive an umber hulk attack often remember precious little of the incident, thanks to the umber hulk’s mind-scrambling gaze.

Devious Delvers. Umber hulks can burrow through solid rock, forming new tunnels in their wake. The steel-hard chitin of its body can withstand the cave-ins, tunnel collapses, and rock falls that commonly follow it.

Burrowing into the wall of a cavern or passageway, an umber hulk lies in wait for creatures to pass by on the other side, its hair-like feelers sensing any movement around it. When it explodes out in a shower of earth and rock, its unsuspecting quarry turns to face the oncoming threat — and is entranced by the umber hulk’s bewildering eyes, forced to stand helpless as its mandibles snap shut.

Mind Scrambler. Many survivors of an umber hulk encounter recollect little about the attack, because the monster’s confusing gaze scrambles their memory of the event. Those who have fought and killed umber hulks recognize the signs. For other denizens of the Underdark, grisly tales of vanished explorers and wanton destruction speak of an unknown foe. Umber hulks take on supernatural status in these harrowing stories, many of which convey the same warning: once an umber hulk has been spotted, it is already too late to escape it.

“The wall caved in. That’s the last thing I remember.”

— A survivor’s account of an umber hulk attack

UMBER HULK
Large monstrosity, chaotic evil

Armor Class 18 (natural armor)

Hit Points 93 (11d10 + 33)

Speed 30 ft., burrow 20 ft.

STR
20 (+5)
DEX
13 (+1)
CON
16 (+3)
INT
9 (−1)
WIS
10 (+0)
CHA
10 (+0)
Senses darkvision 120 ft., tremorsense 60 ft., passive Perception 10

Languages Umber Hulk

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)

Confusing Gaze. When a creature starts its turn within 30 feet of the umber hulk and is able to see the umber hulk’s eyes, the umber hulk can magically force it to make a DC 15 Charisma saving throw, unless the umber hulk is incapacitated.

On a failed saving throw, the creature can’t take reactions until the start of its next turn and rolls a d8 to determine what it does during that turn. On a 1 to 4, the creature does nothing. On a 5 or 6, the creature takes no action but uses all its movement to move in a random direction. On a 7 or 8, the creature makes one melee attack against a random creature, or it does nothing if no creature is within reach.

Unless surprised, a creature can avert its eyes to avoid the saving throw at the start of its turn. If the creature does so, it can’t see the umber hulk until the start of its next turn, when it can avert its eyes again. If the creature looks at the umber hulk in the meantime, it must immediately make the save.

Tunneler. The umber hulk can burrow through solid rock at half its burrowing speed and leaves a 5 foot-wide, 8-foot-high tunnel in its wake.

Actions

Multiattack. The umber hulk makes three attacks: two with its claws and one with its mandibles.

Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 9 (1d8 + 5) slashing damage.

Mandibles. Melee Weapon Attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 14 (2d8 + 5) slashing damage.


Unicorn
Unicorns dwell in enchanted forests. Unrelated to the horses it resembles, a unicorn is a celestial creature that wanders sylvan realms, its white form glimmering like starlight.

A unicorn’s brow sports a single spiraling horn of ivory whose magical touch can heal the sick and the injured. Its ears catch the words and whispers of the creatures that share its domain, and it knows the tongues of elves and sylvan folk. Unicorns allow good-hearted creatures to enter their woods to hunt or gather food, but they hold evil ever at bay. Foul-hearted creatures seldom leave a unicorn’s domain alive.

Divine Guardians. Good deities placed unicorns on the Material Plane to ward away evil and preserve and protect sacred places. Most unicorns protect a bounded realm such as an enchanted forest. However, the gods sometimes send a unicorn to guard sacred artifacts or protect specific creatures. When the forces of darkness strike against an individual the gods wish to protect, they might send that individual to a unicorn’s forest, where evil creatures pursue at their peril.

Unicorns most often serve deities of the forest and woodlands, including the gods of benevolent fey. Although all unicorns have natural healing power, some serve the gods in greater capacities, performing miracles normally reserved for high priests.


Forest Lords. A unicorn’s forest is a celestial realm where nothing that occurs beneath the sun-dappled leaves escapes the creature’s notice. A unicorn hears each breathy tune sung by the elves that reside amid the treetops. It senses where every caterpillar spins its cocoon, each leaf and branch upon which a bright butterfly rests its tired wings.

In a unicorn’s forest, a sense of calm pervades. From wolves and foxes to birds, squirrels, and tiny insects, the creatures of a unicorn’s domain seem quite tame. Pixies, sprites, satyrs, dryads, and other normally mercurial fey loyally serve a unicorn when they dwell within its woods. Under a unicorn’s protection, creatures feel safe from the threat of encroaching civilization and the insidious spread of evil.

A unicorn roams its domain constantly, moving ever so carefully so as not to disturb other denizens. A creature might catch a passing glimpse of the unicorn then suddenly see nothing but the wild woods.

Sacred Horns. A unicorn’s horn is the focus of its power, a shard of divine magic wrought in spiraling ivory. Wands of unicorn horn channel powerful magic, while unicorn horn weapons strike with divine force. Wizards can work powdered unicorn horn into potent potions and scroll ink, or use it as a component in eldritch rituals. However, any creature that takes a role, no matter how small, in slaying a unicorn is likely to become the target of divine retribution.

Blessed Mounts. When darkness and evil threaten to overwhelm the mortal world, the gods sometimes see fit to pair a unicorn mount with a champion. A paladin astride a unicorn is a sign of the gods’ direct intervention in the affairs of the mortal realm. It is a holy alliance made to cleave the heads from demons and banish devils back to the Nine Hells.

UNICORN
Large celestial, lawful good

Armor Class 12

Hit Points 67 (9d10 + 18)

Speed 50 ft.

STR
18 (+4)
DEX
14 (+2)
CON
15 (+2)
INT
11 (+0)
WIS
17 (+3)
CHA
16 (+3)
Damage Immunities poison

Condition Immunities charmed, paralyzed, poisoned

Senses darkvision 60 ft., passive Perception 13

Languages Celestial, Elvish, Sylvan, telepathy 60 ft.

Challenge 5 (1,800 XP)

Charge. If the unicorn moves at least 20 feet straight toward a target and then hits it with a horn attack on the same turn, the target takes an extra 9 (2d8) piercing damage. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or be knocked prone.

Innate Spellcasting. The unicorn’s innate spellcasting ability is Charisma (spell save DC 14). The unicorn can innately cast the following spells, requiring no components:

At will: detect evil and good, druidcraft, pass without trace

1/day each: calm emotions, dispel evil and good, entangle

Magic Resistance. The unicorn has advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects.

Magic Weapons. The unicorn’s weapon attacks are magical.

Actions

Multiattack. The unicorn makes two attacks: one with its hooves and one with its horn.

Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.

Horn. Melee Weapon Attack: +7 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 8 (1d8 + 4) piercing damage.

Healing Touch (3/Day). The unicorn touches another creature with its horn. The target magically regains 11 (2d8 + 2) hit points. In addition, the touch removes all diseases and neutralizes all poisons afflicting the target.

Teleport (1/Day). The unicorn magically teleports itself and up to three willing creatures it can see within 5 feet of it, along with any equipment they are wearing or carrying, to a location the unicorn is familiar with, up to 1 mile away.

Legendary Actions

The unicorn can take 3 legendary actions, choosing from the options below. Only one legendary action option can be used at a time and only at the end of another creature’s turn. The unicorn regains spent legendary actions at the start of its turn.

Hooves. The unicorn makes one attack with its hooves.

Shimmering Shield (Costs 2 Actions). The unicorn creates a shimmering, magical field around itself or another creature it can see within 60 feet of it. The target gains a +2 bonus to AC until the end of the unicorn’s next turn.

Heal Self (Costs 3 Actions). The unicorn magically regains 11 (2d8 + 2) hit points.


As long as the troubled times of darkness persist, the unicorn stays by the champion, its horn shining brightly to drive back the night. However, if the gods’ champion falls from grace or turns from the cause of righteousness and good, the unicorn departs, never to return.

A Unicorn’s Lair

A unicorn’s lair might be an ancient ruin overgrown with vines, a misty clearing surrounded by mighty oaks, a flower-covered hilltop alive with butterflies, or some other serene woodland location.

Regional Effects
Transformed by the creature’s celestial presence, the domain of a unicorn might include any of the following magical effects:

Open flames of a nonmagical nature are extinguished within the unicorn’s domain. Torches and campfires refuse to burn, but closed lanterns are unaffected.
Creatures native to the unicorn’s domain have an easier time hiding; they have advantage on all Dexterity (Stealth) checks made to hide.
When a good-aligned creature casts a spell or uses a magical effect that causes another good-aligned creature to regain hit points, the target regains the maximum number of hit points possible for the spell or effect.
Curses affecting any good-aligned creature are suppressed.
If the unicorn dies, these effects end immediately.